[inaudible].
Welcome back. [inaudible] this is 15, four 45,
six 45 database systems or intro database systems. Ah,
my name is Andy. Uh, I'm pretty sure everyone is in the right place.
Um, so before we begin,
I wanna spend a little time talking about what this course is,
is sort of means to me. Uh, so I had,
I'm going to dedicate this course to, uh, my mentor Leon wrinkles. Um,
he passed away, uh, earlier in the year.
He was listed as one of the original data scientists, right?
He has five TVs in it. He was doing, he started doing data science for data,
data science was a thing. Um,
so he really meant a lot to me and this is with me and him, uh,
and my phd student joy and Mirage earlier in the year and when he was at
hospice. So, um, you know, just as,
as you go throughout the course that he's always going to be in the back of my
mind with everything. The other thing I like to say also too is that, uh,
I wanna thank both DB, uh, for sponsoring the course, right? They provided,
uh, funding for course development. Um,
so there'll be coming later in the semester to give a, uh,
sort of guest lecture at the end, and it's going,
it'll be a nice wrap up to talk about all the things that we'll discuss during
the lecture and you'll see how it's being applied, uh, in,
in real database systems. So we're very appreciative of them, right?
So the clicker room does not work.
All right. So before we send out,
get into the details of the course. Uh,
I wanna tell you a little bit about myself. Um,
I really only care about two things in my life, right? Uh,
the first one is my wife. The second one is databases, right?
I don't care about anything else. I don't talk to my family. Uh,
I don't have any children. The dogs, probably number three,
depending on the day, right? But like,
I really don't care anything about anything else.
So what that means is that when I start talking about databases,
I get very excited and I start talking very quickly, right?
So if I go too fast,
I need you to raise your hand and tell me to shut up and slow down and repeat
myself. Right.
Cause if you're confused about something and somebody else is going to be
confused about something, so please tell me to slow down.
The other thing I also say too is that I will not answer any questions about the
course material or the lecture after the class is over. Right?
So in previous years what will happen is I'll give a lecture and then
immediately afterwards, like five,
he will run up to Russ the stage and ask me questions about like, you know,
slide 23 during the lecture. Right.
I refuse to answer any of those questions because if you have any questions
about the material, stop me while I'm speaking.
Cause if you're confused about something,
somebody else is gonna be confused about something too. Okay?
So I will more than happy to answer questions about the lecture as we go along.
I will answer any questions about the, uh, the material, uh, at the end.
Okay. Alright.
So today's agenda is going to be split into two parts.
We'll start off with talking about the logistics of the course,
what the plan is, what you expected of you as the student. Um,
and then we'll sort of jump right into the material and start talking about, uh,
the relation model in relational Algebra. Okay. And again, the, the,
the assessment in the back is meant to be a test of your knowledge and skill
with c plus. Plus they should really take you two or three minutes.
My PJ student or my students here took two or three minutes, right?
But they didn't [inaudible] all year. Um,
so we're not gonna teach you for those lots to you.
If you're not comfortable with c Plus, plus, then you either,
this might not be the right course for you or you need to sort of brush up on
your CBOs skills, uh, before we get going on the course projects. Okay.
Now, the most important thing that you guys probably care about is, uh,
the wait list. Uh, as of this morning,
we're back up to 150 people. Uh,
the Max capacity is currently like a hundred or so.
I think we're like one oh two one oh three. Right.
So if you're on the wait list, I'm sorry, we just, we just can't take everyone.
Okay. So we will, uh,
people drop the course and we'll pull people off the wait list, uh,
and enroll them. And the way we're gonna do this as that in this,
we all sign you based on the order that you complete the first homework
assignment with 100% score. Right. And that way we're not dealing with,
you know, what program are you in when you graduating, right.
If you've completed the first homework assignment,
which we'll give out on Wednesday, we will, uh, we're,
we're ignoring the wait list order on the, on S3 the order. You complete that.
If the order that we will meet you in the course. Okay.
And we'll keep doing this until we get full. Okay. As far as the, you know,
this the most fair thing we've, we've, we've come up with,
they don't has any better idea, uh, bribing. The TA's does not work.
We got in trouble last year for that, so please don't do that. Uh,
we'll just do it based on homework one. Any questions?
Yes, the whole will be auto lab. It'll be on SQL
right. And Willie's that don't release that on Wednesday. And so you'll get,
you'll get a score right back. Uh, and auto lab.
Keep track of the submission history so we know who you know,
who submitted first
question is if he's on the wait list, we have access to auto lab. Yes.
When we open it up on Wednesday, everyone on wait list on the wait list.
We'll also, we'll have access to all the lab.
Any other questions? Okay.
The seats in the front if you want to sit down. All right, so this course,
1545, six 45,
this course is all about the design principles of a database management systems.
So specifically we're going to look at disc oriented,
a relational database management and we'll cover what that is as we go
throughout the semester.
But all I'll say is that this is not a course about how to actually build
database applications or model database applications. Right.
I'll teach you a advanced SQL on on Wednesday this week,
but I'm assuming most people already knew how to write basic sequel, right?
Or build database applications already, right?
So we're really focusing on how do you actually build that,
the underlying software to manage the database, right?
So this is not what you're looking for, right?
This is why I'm asking you to take the CFO plus self exam, right?
This is a project intensive course.
If you care about more about the high level things about you know,
how to model or administrator database.
Then the alternative you might want to look at is CMU 95 seven or three in
Heinz College,
I think it might be just called databases or database information system,
something like that. Okay. Again,
this is a computer science course about the design of a database management
software.
Now there was also another database course in CSD called database applications.
That was sort of a hybrid routine.
Heinz College course and what this course is 15 four 15 or six 15 so you
somebody who may have signed up for that.
Unfortunately that's been canceled because Professor Christus Soludos is taking
another year off to go join his, uh, ag pop cover band.
Right. Um, so this is their album they put out earlier in the year. Uh,
so unfortunately he's gone.
So that's not going to be a taught this year as well. So as far as you know,
this is the only CSD course available for databases. So the,
the way to think about how we're gonna organize the course material is that
pretty much this week is the only week we'll talk about sort of the high level
stuff, but how do you actually the,
the theory behind database systems or relational model and how do you write SQL
on it. And then going forward, starting next week,
we're going to start at the bottom of the stack and start building up the layers
to actually build a database management system, right?
So by the end of the semester, you should be able to know and understand,
you know, pretty much how any database man of is going to be built.
Now there'll be some in-memory stuff we'll talk about in the advanced class in
the spring,
but this is really like the fundamentals of pretty much every single database
system that's out there, right? So we'll start off with talking about storage.
And then on top of that we'll tell you how to do query execution.
Now on top of that,
we'll talk about how to do a transaction management with concur to control. Um,
and then we'll talk about how to do recovery and maintaining logs and
checkpoints and things like that. And at the end of the semester,
we'll spend a few weeks talking about distributed databases or cloud databases.
And now I like to finish up the last week,
which I call sort of a system popery where we sort of do a brain dump on here's
how a bunch of different real world database management systems are actually
implemented. Again,
the volt TV guys will come and give a talk and then I like to spend the last
class.
If you're just letting you guys pick any database system and I'll spend 10
minutes discussing how it works, right?
And this is useful because now you'll be able to apply the techniques that we
talk about during the lecturer or the semester and see how they actually can,
are used in, in real world systems.
So chorus policy and the schedule are available on the course website,
which I sent out last night on Piazza. Um, again, this is an upper level course.
I shouldn't have to go over to academic honesty policy,
but that's the link to it at CMU. Right?
Just the bottom line is don't be stupid. Right?
This is not a group project course. Everything should be done individually,
even the c plus all self-assessment. Uh, and so I would,
I prefer is that if you're unsure about something, right,
please come ask me whether that's the right thing to do or not.
Cause I rather have you say, hey look, I, I've been, you know,
working with somebody on our project up are both writing separate code.
Is that okay?
I'd rather have you come talk to me first rather than me find out later on that
you guys been copying code from each other and then we have to send you over to
Warner Hall. Destroy your life. Right.
So do the bottom line is please don't be stupid. Okay.
If you're not sure about something and please ask me all the discussions and
announcements for the course will be on Piatsa. Uh, if you're on the wait list,
you should be able to sign up for this. Right?
I don't think there's any restrictions there. A CMU wants me to use canvas,
right? We use that. Last year it was, it was a disaster.
So everything will be done on, on Piazza. Okay.
There is a textbook for this course, a database systems constant from, from Abi.
Uh, Hank and Shawna. Sean, um, the, this is a,
this is my opinion.
This is actually probably the best database systems textbook on the,
on the market. Now. A lot of them are that are out there that looks at,
most of them are like 10, 15 years old.
This one I think is maybe six or eight years old by now,
but the newer version is coming out in this year,
but the sixth version is good enough for what we want. Um,
so again, W for every single lecture I'll provide the chapters,
you can read for supplemental information to go over the material a bit more
detail. Uh, I,
but there'll be some material that's actually not covered in the textbook.
And so for every single lecture we'll also provide lecture notes that cover the,
the, so the main points that were discussed during class
for the grades, uh, the distribution will look like this, right?
So if you're a scs Undergrad, uh,
this class now counts for the systems elective, right?
And the requirement there is it has to have over 40% count for projects.
And that's why it's 45% per projects. Um,
so there'll be a midterm exam and a final exam.
And then later on in a few weeks I'll discuss the opportunity for doing extra
credit. Basically, we're writing an encyclopedia about databases.
So you pick one database system that you want to learn about and you just write
an article for it. Okay. And again, I'll cover this late in the semester.
Alright. For the homework to be five during the semester,
the first one will be the SQL assignment that we're putting out on Wednesday,
and that one will be submitted through auto lab and it'd be auto graded and you
get feedback right away.
And then all the rest of the homework assignments will be pens on paper that
you'll submit a pds or photographs on a on grade scope.
Okay. And again, these should be all be done done individually
for the projects. Uh, the, it's sort of like the,
in the Ols class four 40, where you're sort of building out your own, uh,
core piece of software and every single project will build on your previous
implementation. So by the end of the semester,
the goal would be to actually build your own database storage manager, um,
from scratch.
And we'll provide you guys from some scaffolding and sort of fill in the,
the key parts. Um, so again, for this and it's gonna be all in c plus plus 11.
Um, so we're not going to teach you how to write seabass laws.
You can't come to office hours and say, I don't understand c plus clause.
We're not gonna teach you how to use GDB,
right or not can get you all the other tools to do debugging. Again,
this is CMU should be able to figure this out already, know it ahead of time.
Um, if you're not comfortable with this. And then again,
this might not be the right course for you,
I'll say also to is that every project is going to build on the previous one,
right?
So the first one is the buffer pool manager and the second one is the indexes.
You can't build your index unless you have the buffer manager.
So it's really important that you meet all these deadlines and you're always
keeping up with the coursework. And if you have problems with that, uh,
talk to me as soon as possible.
And that way we can figure out what the right thing is.
The late policy is that, uh, for both homeworks and projects,
you're allowed a total of four slip days, right?
So the deadline will be always at midnight for a project or homework and then
any, any one minute over that deadline, uh,
is considered late up for a 24 hour period. And then you're allowed to be late,
uh, at least four days throughout the entire semester. Right? So as for, in,
in for both homeworks and projects, not for, for each category.
Right. And then when you, when you submit it, please just mark down, you know,
how many, how many days you're late and how many days you are,
late days you have, you think you have left, right.
That way you sort of do a self audit to know where you're at throughout the
semester. And again, this is Carnegie Mellon, right?
I shouldn't have to say this, but I have two, uh, all the homeworks and product,
it should be done on by yourself. They are not group assignments, right?
It's not four 40. We have a partner. Everything should be done individually.
All right? I need, you can't copy source code from other people in the class.
You can't copy the source code from the Internet.
Now some people took our source code from last year.
They weren't seeing your students. It's on Github. I seen her code. It's crap.
You don't want it. Uh,
and it actually won't work this year cause we're going to switch some things up
cause we're going to switch from SQL lite to postgres. Um, so, but again,
bottom line is just don't copy from other people,
don't copy from things that you didn't write. Right. And then if I,
we find it, uh, when we run it through a auto lab, uh, you know,
if it finds that you copy code and then we have to report you. Okay.
All right. The last thing I'll say also too is that going beyond the,
the material that we're going to talk about today,
if you want to get more involved with, uh,
of database research here at Carnegie Mellon,
just learn about more databases in general. Uh,
there's three opportunities to do this. Um, again, I announced this on Piazza.
The first is that the CMU database research group meets on Mondays at four 30,
right? This is the sort of casual, uh, setting where we have researchers, uh,
my students and sort of sometimes outside, uh,
people come talk about this kind of stuff they're doing in databases. Um,
if you want to get involved on the development side of the data system,
we're actually doing a brand new database system here at Carnegie Mellon from
scratch called Peloton. Uh,
all my students are working on this.
So we have our developer meetings on Tuesdays at 12:00 PM in, uh,
in gates, Gates Hall. Okay. Tillman, um, if you,
if you want to take the advanced class in the spring, uh, it's all,
it's all based on the system or grant.
If you just wanna get your hands dirty on sort of what I call a sort of
commercial grade database system, although we're not there yet, uh,
then you can get involved in this project here. Right?
And if you're in some master's programs, you have to do capstones.
If you want to actually do a capstan with me a year from now,
it'll be based on the system. So you want to get started as soon as possible.
What also say too is that, again, not to toot my own horn,
but all the students that come work with me on this project have more job to
turn down than they know what to deal with, right?
Cause all of the data is companies, my friends at David's companies are,
are emailing me, asking more students that come out and come out of our group,
right? Because they can't hire people fast enough.
Now the current name of the project is Peloton.
We're going to have to change the name, uh,
this semester because it's assholes with the exercise bike on, on TV. Uh,
we don't know if we're gonna call it yet,
but that's the current name now and also say too,
is we spent the summer actually rewriting a lot of the storage engine from
scratch and now we're gonna start bringing in the pieces of the old code into
our new repository.
So it's a good opportunity to get started early on this and sort of understand
how all the different pieces work together. And again, I promise you,
you will have no problem finding a job if you, uh,
if you get involved in database systems.
And the last one also to announce is that I am running a seminar series, uh,
this, this semester that'll be on Thursdays, but not every Thursday, uh,
in, in the CIC building. Um,
and so will I do every fall semester is I have a seminar series on sort of one
particular theme or category of databases.
So this year ever doing hardware accelerated databases.
So the thing of like of database system,
that set of running everything on the g on the CPU,
they can run it on the GPU or other exotic hardware.
So the first speaker will be, uh,
next week I'm coming from a Connectica, which is like, again,
a GPU based database. Everything will be on youtube,
but if you want to come get pizza and,
and sort of meat meat and talked about what these guys are doing,
then I encourage you to do that. Okay.
[inaudible]
any questions about the course? So what's expected to you?
Yes,
he's question is is will the slide deck be uploaded online? Which slide deck?
These are mine. Everything will be on youtube. Everything will be online,
right? But if the DYI DIY, DIY,
DIY operation. So if it doesn't work, it doesn't work. All right?
But this the slide to be on. Any other questions?
Let's jump into databases.
My second most favorite thing in my life can,
I want to give you a good example of a database
was that she's SQL lite.
Now he says Mommy to be no
red shift. No, go for it.
There you go. Students of the class, right? So she said sequel bite.
He said Mongo DB. He said Russia. Those are database management systems.
He said the students in the class, that is a database. Correct?
So a database is an organized collection of interrelated data that it's going to
model some aspect of the real world. So here's the example, procreate, right?
A database could be the list of students that are enrolled in this class right
now you need software to actually manage that.
And that's what the data is [inaudible] system is, right, or Dbms, right?
So the reason why I think this course is important, um,
obviously because I'm biased,
but the databases that are going to be the sort of core component of almost
every single aspect of technology or computer applications that exist in the
world, I guarantee you that even if you don't go into the computer field,
if you go to any field that's related to technology,
you will come across databases throughout your life, right?
Every single website you can think of is that's doing something meaningful is
going to be backed by a database, right?
Every single major computer application is going to be backed by a database at
the end.
And then you need a database minute system to actually manage that software and
provide you some nights guarantees that you don't want to have to end up writing
yourself.
So let's use this simple example of a database and then we'll see actually how
we could actually maybe manage this ourselves or manage this with software.
So let's say that we want to create a database that models a, you know,
digital music store or something like Spotify, right? All right?
In our database we want to keep track of the artists and the albums that they
put out, right? So what do we need to store, right?
We have information about the artists and then we're going to have information
about the albums that there's artists end up releasing. All right?
So the easiest way,
the most trivial way to actually implement something like this is you use what I
call flat files.
So basically you have a text file that it's using the CSV format, comma,
separated values, right? And you have one fall for artists, one fall,
four for albums,
and every single line in in the file is going to be one entry or one,
you know, one album or one artist, right?
So this is the most primitive sort of database you could actually build,
right?
And what's going to happen is in order to actually to operate on it in our
application code, we're in epic.
We're going to have to write our own code to actually manage these files and
themselves. So if you want to do a lookup to try to find a particular entry,
we would have to open up the file, loop through it,
and look at every single line parts, the parts, the commas, fine work, you know,
the, the, the name of the artist is and extract the one that we actually want.
So let's see what this will look like. All right, so again, say I have my,
I have two files, one for artists, one for albums. So in the, the,
the text above the file, it says artists.
And then in parentheses I have the attributes that they're storing.
So the artists can have a name a year in a country, right?
And the album can have the named artists and in the year, right? Pretty simple.
And then again, the, each attribute on a line is gonna be separated by Commas.
That's how we're going to note the different fields or different attributes.
So let's say I want to write a simple query that gets the year that ice key went
solo, right? Ice Cube was an NWA, right? They were screwing them over for money.
So then he broke out and did a solo career. Right.
So the way we would do this is that we use,
right sort of python code like this that again just iterates every single line
checks to see whether a tr or each line split up the comments to get I,
I record and then jump to the first asset in that record array and the check,
which we now know is the name to check to see whether it matches the thing that
we're looking for and we find the thing that we want.
And we then just print out the the year field and after casting it to an
integer, pretty simple. Right.
What are some problems with this?
Yes.
We're not. No. And uh, the artists are arranged chronologically,
so you might get a year that he wants a little bit,
not the year that we want to land. So hold on actually.
So he said that we don't know whether the sort of the lines are the columns,
like we don't know that.
Yeah. First thing in appearance. All right. It's going to be around. Yes.
You said that we don't know whether the first thing that appears for ice cube is
going to be the year that actually did, he went solo. Right?
Okay. And for this we can assume that ice cube, oh, Peter once, yeah. Yes.
It's what? Right. So you said it,
it's costly. Meaning like my example here is three lines.
Even 10,000 lines is not gonna be a big deal.
Think 10 billion, right? Some, you know,
there's databases that big like the Walmart database,
it's every single item that anyone's ever bought at a Walmart, right?
It's gonna be billions, right? I think so.
I think we're all in agreement that it sucks. Right? It's a bad idea.
Let's go a bit more detail. What's going on.
So the first part I'm going to face is that, uh,
how are we going to ensure that we always use the same name, uh,
for each album entry? Right?
So if I see ice cube puts out different albums I have in my album a file,
right? I'm repeating ice cube. Oh, never again.
But let's say ice cube changed his name for whatever reason.
How do we make sure that we update all the entries for ice cube so they're
always the same?
Next problem is that what happens if someone comes along and puts in a,
you know, changes an album year and puts in a funky string that,
that that's not a an actual integer, right? Again, these are just text files.
I can open up my favorite editor and muck around them as much as I want and then
now my program that's actually going to just parse them and try to figure out
what you know in interpret meaning from them.
It's going to come across data that it doesn't expect to actually see, so what,
what, what should actually happen and there's no way we can prevent that because
again, they're just text files sitting in the file system. Anybody can,
anybody can open up, open them up and change them.
The next problem is that how are we going to deal with a case where we have
albums with multiple artists, right?
If you have a mix tape that gets dropped and there's bunch of artists that are
on there together, how do I actually model that in my flat files? Right?
I was assuming that there was only one artist at a time,
but now you've got to do something scary.
Like maybe I'll take my artist's field and I'll make an internal commerce
separated list at t to note the, uh, multiple artists around that.
But that's kind of weird now and I have to change my application code to
actually deal with that.
Then we actually have now the code to actually open up these files and find the
data that would, that we want. Right?
So the first problem is how do you define a particular record?
So she pointed out that in my simple example here of three lines,
that's not a big deal. Then she said maybe 10,000 lines would be a problem.
That's not a big deal either. It's when you actually get into the billions.
I really large uh, uh,
datasets then open up the file every single time you run a query and scanning
through every single entry is going to be really slow. Right.
Just to find one record, right.
Maybe we look out and the first one is the one we're actually looking for.
Worst case scenario is the last one right
now. Now I'll say also too is that maybe for our first implementation,
our first application we built,
we were running like a website that was using these files,
but now we want to have like a sort of a separate service or a desktop
application and actually use these files.
Right now we have to rewrite all the code we had in the first application to
open up the files and parse them and get out the data that we want.
We have to duplicate that in our, in our second application and so on.
Right now we've got to make sure that they're always in sync as well. Right.
If we change any aspect of the files and make sure we have to change both
applications. The last one is that what if we have,
uh, you know, two separate applications or two processes or two threads,
both trying to update the same file at the same time? What's gonna Happen?
Right? Well, we just let the operating system manage this for us.
Then it's going to be the last provider, right?
So the first guy could open the file, second guy could open the file.
The first guy does the right, the second guy then does a right.
It's going to clobber the first guys, right? So we ended up losing data,
right?
The last problem now we got to deal with is how to make sure that our data is
safe, right? It's not cool that your bank loses your money, right?
We don't want to lose any data. So how do we actually ensure that, well,
if we have these, you know,
our simple python code to open up these files and parse them and we start
updating things,
what happens when the machine crashes or the application crashes while we're
doing a right? Right? Worst case scenario,
we just lost whatever the last thing that we wrote, right?
Can even worse thing would be actually the file gets corrupted and we lose all
our data.
So we need an application to make sure that that we don't lose anything.
But now let's say that we wanna make sure that our database is always
accessible, right? If you have a website you never wanted to go down,
so no always need to be up.
So what you want to do is maybe replicated across multiple machines so that if
one machine goes down, the second one can, can keep on running still.
And it's still service requests. But now if I,
if I have two machines updating the same data set the same time,
how do I make sure those things are in sync?
So the, the answer to this is a database management system, right?
I dated has been a system is,
is software that's specifically designed to store and analyze information in a
database, right? And there's different kinds of data.
Data is managed systems are different systems that do serve different types of
applications scenarios. But at a high level, this is all,
this is what they're going to do.
So the idea to think way to think about this is instead of writing all that code
to open up those files and manage them for every single time I write an
application on my database, a database admin assistant will do this for me,
right?
And that way I can worry about writing all the business logic or the other
complicated code that I want to have in my application that actually serves the
purpose of the business or whatever it is that I'm trying to accomplish.
And I leave the data system to manage all the durability and guarantees that I
would want and from my data.
And the reason why I think I again think about why this is so important.
Think about all the courses that seem new offers, right?
Or as far as in the CS Department or ses, right?
There's a course just for this, you know, database systems.
Actually there's two courses cause I have two of them, right? There's no,
of course you had to write out a web browser, right?
There's of course that teach operating systems, right?
These are core important core components you need to have for a, you know,
in modern applications. That's why I think this is where starting.
So now it's sort of taken for granted in today's time that we have all these
database options available to us. Uh, but didn't always use to be the case.
Right? Again, when I asked you guys name of database, I heard red ship,
I heard mango,
I heard a SQL lite by these things that these things exist now and they solve a
lot of the problems that we want to have for, for databases.
But back in the old days, it certainly wasn't like this at all.
So if you go back to like the 1960s, 1970s,
when the first database systems sort of came online, um,
these things are actually really difficult to use and maintain, right?
And part of the reason is because there was this tight coupling between the
logical layer of the database and the physical layer.
So the logical layer would be what I was showing before when I describe the,
you know, my, the, the music store and the logical layer would be, here's,
I have an artist and it has artists, has these attributes and I have an album,
an album has these attributes.
The physical layer would be how that data's actually being represented and
stored in bites on in memory and on, on the,
on the hard drive. Right? So back then in the 1960s,
1970s and these first database systems,
you would actually define exactly the physical structure of the database in your
application code, right?
So the first example of one of the earliest databases was this thing called a
ims from IBM information management system. It's actually, they built the,
the this database system, uh, as part of the, the, the Apollo Moon mission,
right? To keep track of all the parts. They were, they were,
they needed to build the rockets for the, the to go up in the space.
So back then, the way ims would work was you would say are,
here's my database and I want to store it as a hash table or here's my database
and I want to store this as as a, as a, as a tree structure.
It could be plus three.
And then based on what you actually defined as the physical data structure for
you for your table or your database,
that would then expose a certain API to you in your application.
So if you've got a hash table, you could do point queries,
do single key lookups. If you had a, if I had a tree structure,
you can do range scans. All right, so the issue was then, now if you,
if you later on decided,
oh I don't want to hash table actually want a tree structure,
then you gotta not only dump out the database and put it back in as a tree,
the need to go back and modify all your application to now use the,
the tree structure API instead of the hash table. Right.
So essentially you kind of had to know exactly how the data was going to be used
before you actually started building your application. Right? Which is not,
not always the case and not easy to do.
So what happened was in at IBM, uh, in the late 1960s,
early 1970s, uh, there was this guy fresh out of Grad school, uh,
named Ted Cod. And this is, this is IBM research in New York and Watson. Um,
and he basically went around IBM and he saw all these people writing, uh,
you know,
these programmers rewriting the database applications over and over again
because they had to deal with the case of, of, you know, the,
the physical data structure change or the logical structure change and didn't
rewrite the application from scratch. Now, back then again,
humans were cheaper than the machines. It's the opposite now. So,
you know, you just throw more money and hire more programmers,
but this is not scalable. Right?
So he saw this and he saw that this is a clear problem and this is because there
was a tight coupling between the physical layer and the logical layer.
So he wrote the seminal paper in a tech report in 19, uh,
in late 1960s and then there was actually the,
the full paper in CACM in the 1970s and he proposed what was called the
relational model
and the relational model basically has four, three key points.
The first is that you're going to store your database as these simple data
structures, correlations. I, this is at a logical level.
You're not just defining trees,
you're not defining these weird hierarchies that people were using back then,
but you just say, here's my, here's my relation,
here's the Astros that it has and that's the end of it and I would have all the
relations as well. Then you would have now a, a,
you would access your,
your relations through a high level of language or declarative language, right.
This is, this is before SQL, but the, it was sort of basically what sequel is,
is now I said no longer in the ims case. What I would say, all right,
I have a tree data structure and here's the API for me to make calls to it.
He wouldn't do that anymore. You just say, here's the query I want to execute.
You don't care how the data system actually stores it.
It'll figure out how to do this for you. Right.
This is actually pretty controversial back then. Right?
Back then people were saying there's no way a query optimizer and a database
system will be able to generate a query plan that's as efficient and what a
human can code. All right.
This is sort of similar to what people were saying back then about compilers or
there's no way a compiler or c compiler could generate machine code that's as
efficient as assembly written by a human. Right, and for some of the cases,
I'm sure that that's true, but most of the times nowadays, nowadays it is not.
Right. Competitors is actually pretty good. So the last piece is the the,
what I was saying about before is that because now we have this decoupling
between the logical layer and the physical layer.
It's now up to the database man of system itself to figure out what the most
efficient way to actually store your, your, your data, right. For each table,
each relation. So no longer did I have to say store this table as a tree store,
this table as a hash table, I would just say, here's my table,
here's the extracts that it has.
And it was up for the database admin assistant to figure it out based on the
queries you want to run on it.
What was the most efficient way to actually store this? Right.
And we'll see this later on.
There's nothing that says that it actually has to be static, right?
It could decide a tree structure is the right thing now, but based on what,
how your applications actually using it because switch over to a hash table or
some other data structure and that's fine because of the first point,
because we're writing or the second point,
because we're writing our queries in a high level language that doesn't have any
information about how band line data structure is.
The Davis system is free to change this any way that it wants and use the
program and don't, don't care.
So the other key thing that sort of cod also PR produce is this notion of a data
model, right? The data model is essentially a,
there's a high level concept that is a way to describe the collection of the
data that you would actually store in a database.
So the relational model is one example.
And the next slide we'll see a bunch of other ones, right?
He sort of was the first person that said, all right,
here's what this actually means. Uh, you're not just making, you know,
you're not just dumping data into a database.
You're actually can represent it as data model and at a more high level, uh,
abstraction. And then a Schema is,
will be an actual description.
All the collection of data for is given data model. So again,
if you're familiar with SQL, right? SQL,
you call create table to define a table, right?
That's the Schema to represent a piece of data or a collection of data within a
relational model database. So as I said,
there's a bunch of different data models that are out there.
These are probably the main ones that are out there now.
There's even more obscure ones.
Theoreticians went buck wild on this in 1980s and there's a bunch of different
things, uh,
that there are some systems out there that actually implemented most of the time
you don't need to know, don't need to care. Um, so again,
most database systems that you can think about are using, uh,
the relational data model. So the three we had listed at the beginning,
CQL light red shift and Mongo DB,
SQL light and red shift and relational databases.
Mongo DB is considered a document database root, right? Or an object database.
Um, there's another class of systems you might be familiar with called no SQL.
Um, they sort of fall into these data models here.
Key value graph document column family. Again,
Mongo is a document database graph database would be typical like neo four.
J M key value would be like Retis a dynamo DB and column family would be um,
uh, like h base or a big table from Google.
A lot of things, a lot of people say these systems called no Siegel.
A lot of them actually now adding back SQL support, right? So you can just,
you can run SQL on top of these different data models.
You're also have array and matrix data models, right?
So instead of serving things, relations,
you sort of things as multidimensional arrays. Um,
there are a small number of systems that actually do this [inaudible] as
probably the most famous one.
And then the last two are these hierarchal and network data model. Uh,
so ims is hierarchical. The network data model was this other thing, uh, called,
uh, IDM. What's a Cota sell model? These are obsolete and rare.
If you hate yourself and you want to get a job in the industry to do maintenance
on old code from the 1960s, right? You will come across these solid databases.
But if you're a new startup, there's no way how you would actually use this.
Okay. So for this class,
we're going to focus mostly on the relational data model.
And part of the reason is that with the exception for the array and matrices,
you can represent all of these things,
all these other data models and the relational model, right?
A key value model is that sort of relation with you know, two columns,
right? Graph databases you can represent the relationships is again, just as,
as another relation. Um, is my opinion that, uh,
most of the Times people, what people need is a relational data model. Uh,
there are obviously some cases where one of these more specialized systems might
actually be better,
but it's more about the API did expose to you as the programmer.
Uh, and not so much how the data is actually stored, right?
So in the graph databases, for example, they have specialized, uh, you know,
function calls and, and ways run queries that,
that assume you're running on a graph model and therefore they can work more
efficiently than writing a sequel. But again, at the storage level, they're,
they're essentially the same. Okay.
So the relational data models can define three things.
So the first is the structure, right? And this is essentially a definition of,
for each relation, here's the attributes that they have and here's the,
the main of the values that you can actually store in them.
So my example earlier when I show the artist relation or the artist's table,
right? And artist had a name, a country and a year, right?
The name has to be like a string type and the year has to be entered your type
right, that you defined that in, in the structure.
Then you have the integrity, uh, definitions. And this is essentially the,
the constraints you can impose on the,
on the tuples and the values for the attributes that have to be satisfied in
order for you. A lot of store a tuple in the, uh, ashore, a tube in,
into that relation. So again, I, my structure defined, I have three fields,
name, country and, and year. And then a integrity constraint could be,
I can't store anything unless it's an integer for a year, right?
Otherwise it's an invalid tool. And the last one is defining, uh,
the manipulation and constructs.
And this is essentially how are we gonna actually access and modify the data in
interrelation?
So this is what we're gonna talk about today when we talk about Relational
Algebra, right? And SQL,
this essentially you define your tables and then you just,
you write queries that actually get the get to the data.
So the relational model is the,
is based on this notion of a relation, right?
I say don't think of it as like I'm in a relationship with my wife or your your
whatever. Right?
It's the actual table self in the mathematical terms is called a relation.
And so our relation is going to be an unordered set that contained the
relationship attributes that present represent different entities in,
in that table, in that relation. Right?
So the important thing that's going to come up throughout the semester is this
notion that the relations are unordered, right?
And this is going to actually get this matter from a, from a,
from a systems implementation standpoint,
because we don't have to maintain ordering this is,
allows us to do a lot of things more efficiently than you would have otherwise.
Right?
So it also means that we're going to end up cases where a query can produce
different results that are actually still all considered correct because things
are on order, right? If you care about ordering,
you define order by to sort things, right? If not, then it's,
it can be any random order that it wants.
And then with a relationship we can have a two pole, right?
And that's going to be defined by the set of attribute values for any given
instance of a, a relationship with in, in, in our relation.
So under the original description of the relational model from,
from Ted cod from the 1970s,
the values for the attributes in a tuple had to be scalar or atomic, right?
You mean the, they can't be lists,
they can't be sort of nested data structures in neuro systems that's actually
relaxed. You can actually do this,
but in the original definition you couldn't and they're also going to, uh,
have a special bio called null that works a lot.
Like how Knowles work in C or c plus plus by essentially means that the value
for particular attribute will be undefined, right? This data isn't simply,
doesn't know anything about. So in our example from before,
from artist's name and year, right? This is defining the relationship for that,
right? It says it looks the same thing as, as our flat files,
except now that I'm, I'm the, the, the data didn't actually,
he's maintaining the field delimiters in themselves.
I no longer have to po parse commas to be a bit more mathematical.
Uh, we can say that a, uh,
a relation that has an attributes is called a n Arie relation,
right. And area would come up later on when we talk about the,
the storage models for these things. Um, but it is so that you, you know,
the term, uh, it means an airy. All right.
The other key thing about relational models that introduces two types of keys,
so primary keys and foreign keys.
So a primary key is some set of attributes for that relation that will uniquely
identify every single Tubal or are exactly one tuple.
So in this case here, uh,
none of these are actually [inaudible] the primary key for us because there's
nothing really stopping from someone else from naming their band ice cube,
right? So we can't assume that the name is going to be unique, right?
So what we can do instead is we can introduce a special primary key called the
ID, right?
And this is just some unique integer to represent exactly are the one tool that
we want.
So what will happen is that if you don't define a primary key,
some database systems will actually generate one for you,
but they'll maintain it internally. So my Siegel for example,
if you don't declare a primary key underneath the covers, it uses the row id,
which is like basically the block id in offset of where it's actually stored on
disc. And I use that to represent the primary key for you. Um,
if you will talk about primary key index is later on.
But if you create one then as much other optimizations can do to find data
[inaudible] more quickly for doing, you know,
slacks and updates and things like that.
And then instead of having to maintain the, you know, this,
this counter for the ID manly in your application, a lot of data,
data systems also support for audit, what to call auto-generated keys.
So in the SQL standard, it's called sequence. In my SQL,
we'll see this over and over again.
My SQL likes to do things differently for whatever reason,
they call them auto increment. And basically what happened is now,
if I insert a two pole,
is a counter to always gets added one and creates a new primary entry for me.
The other type of key to care about are called foreign keys. And this is,
this is going to allow us to model the relationships of relations, uh,
to make sure that we're always in sync with each other.
So foreign key is going to allow it to say that one attribute for one relation
has to have a matching value in another relation. Remember I said before,
the example was how do I,
how do I make sure that if I have all these albums where ice cube and ice cube
changes his name,
how do I make sure that they're always in sync with each other? Right? Well,
foreign keys will solve this problem for us.
So this is the example we have before. Right now we're using, issuing the,
the primary key with the integer. Uh, as the ID field.
But in the case of, uh, using this Ms. Campbell, the mixed tape here,
say this, I have multiple artists here. I said before,
the relational model has to have scalar values.
So I can't have a list of values here. I need to have some way to keep track of,
there's multiple, there's multiple art artists that belong to a single album,
right? So I can do this through a,
what's called a cross reference table and here the,
that standard way to denote this as this concatenate the two names of the
relation to two names of the tables together.
So now I have a new relationship called artist album that's going to have an
artist id and an album id. Um,
I no longer need to store the artist and the album table.
And then I have foreign keys. Now in this other relation. Now pointing to these,
both of these things here and the combination of an art's Id.
And now my id is the primary key for this relation cause you can have multiple
attributes together as the primary key. This assures that one artist can't be,
uh, on the same album multiple times or did noted that's on the same time.
Right. So we'll see this later on. We talk about joins,
but now I can write queries that we'll combine these relations together and
match up the different attributes based on their foreign keys and underneath the
car that the data center most data systems will actually do is that if I try to
insert an entry into the artist's album relation that doesn't have a matching
artist and the artist table and does it have a matching album in the album
table? It'll throw an error. It'll prevent me from doing that. Right.
Cause it says I don't have a, you know,
there's no corresponding match for the foreign king or likewise, if I delete a,
an ng from the album table,
I can have it automatically delete the entry from the artist album table.
Or this is called a cascading delete. Right.
This ensures that there's no pointer just to,
to something that doesn't exist anymore.
And it is another good example of what I gave to these ministers will provide
for you that you would otherwise have to write yourself [inaudible] your
application code. All right,
so now that we understand roughly what a relational model is and how we're
actually can store data in them,
now we need to actually get get data out of it, right?
I put data in and get data out of it, right?
And there's essentially two sort of classes of languages that you can implement
for this on the first are called procedural where this is where you're going to
find at a high level the actual steps you're going to execute it to run your
query. Um, and the second one is called non procedural.
You're describing a really high level,
the answer you want the data system to actually compute and then it's left to
figure out how to actually do that automatically on its own.
So the first one is is with the category of relationship Relational Algebra is
which we'll cover the next couple of slides.
The last one is what relational calculus is based on.
We are not going to cover this because its usefulness is very limited for what
we care about in this course. A,
if you're building a query optimizer from scratch,
this is something that you have to understand.
Or let's say you want to replace SQL with something even better.
Although in my opinion, SQL is pretty good. Uh, then you would,
you have to understand relational calculus actually had to do this. So we're,
we're going to focus on a relational Algebra here. So,
so relational Algebra again is the, uh, the funnel on operations.
We can define actually retrieve and manipulate data. Uh,
and that actually stored in a relation, and this is again,
this was defined by Ted Cobb when he wrote this early papers in the 1970s.
Right? He sort of laid out,
here's what a relational model is and here's a relational Algebra to actually
read and write data or get data in and out of relations.
So there's going to be a seven different operators we're going to care about.
Uh, we'll go through these at a high level.
They'll mostly come up later on when we talk about query execution. Um,
they're not, they're not hard to understand.
I think it's important to get to see them once so that when they come up again,
you know what they are.
So each operator's gonna take in either one or more relations as the input and
it's always going to output a new relation.
And the idea here is that when we actually want to write queries,
we're going to chain together all these operators together using them as sort of
the, the,
the building blocks to then generate more complex queries that derive more
complicated answers then the basic things.
So the first relational operator is to do a select right?
And that's represented by the, the lower case sigma sigma symbol. Right?
In my opinion, this is easy to,
aren't easy to remember because to select certain s in the sigma starts with an
s. Um,
but the basic idea is here is that we're going to take our relation as their
input and then we're going to select or choose a subset of the Tupelos that we
actually want to produce as our output. Right.
In the actual original relational model papers. The, these are called restrict,
right?
Because you're essentially restricting what tuples are actually put in the
outlet. Alright.
Skinny representatives with the lower the lower sigma fall by a a subscript
credit kit. I think of like, you know, something like classic bullying logic.
Like if something's great and it's something or them in glass and something.
And then we define what relation we want. Apply the selection on.
Let's say I was to build relation like this,
I have relation are these two attributes, ae aid and PID.
So I can have a select like this and it says where aid equals a two.
And then the output that's produced is just again,
any tool where the attribute a aid equals eight too.
I can start combining these together. A, again,
using conjunctions and disjunctions do things like uh,
select where aid is equals two and bid is greater than one or two.
And again, that just only selects that one. Two was the output, right?
Pretty straight forward in sequel,
essentially it looks,
what we're defining here is essentially the same thing as like the where clause,
right? So this what we have in the,
where clause below is the same thing as we had up above in,
in, uh, for our predicate here, right? Again,
it's not exactly the same as the select cause the slot can do in SQL can do a
bunch of more stuff that we can't do here in relational Algebra.
Next to me have this projection and projection is basically going to limit which
attributes actually get produced as the output from the input, right?
So again, projection starts with a p.
You represent this with a lowercase pie symbol. Um,
the thing you can do with the projection is that you can add more than just
saying, take these attributes and produces my output. You can,
you actually can reorder them, right? The output of,
of the output of, of these operators are actually, uh,
the order actually matters. So the attributes in,
in a single tuple the ordering of the tuples across the entire relation,
it actually doesn't matter.
You can also actually manipulate them to actually change the output based on
some additional logic.
So I can do a projection like this where I say, uh,
I have my inner select where I say aid equals two from the relation r but then
in my projection list I want to take the bid,
subtract it by a hundred and then output the aid.
So I'm flipping the order and manipulating the bid. Right? And again,
now you see how we started to chain these things together to produce more
complicated things. And in sequel it would essentially look like this, right?
The, the output target of the select statement is it's the same thing in,
in my uh, upper target in the projection operator. Yes.
It's question is,
is it fair to say that sequel is inherently procedural? No.
So sequel is actually a non procedural language based on Relational Algebra.
Or the difference here is that in sequel I'm saying,
I'm defining what I want, not actually how to actually execute that.
Right? Aim Relational Algebra. You would start at the, the inside of the,
of the, of the parentheses.
So I have to do this select first and then I can do my projection, right?
So I sort of like,
it's almost like the exact steps you have to execute deck to produce the answer.
In sequel for the simple example,
you would essentially do it the same way the relational Algebra is written,
but we see more complicated things. It does. You don't,
you don't have to execute it the same way in the relational Algebra.
It actually defines it.
All right? So now we can talk about the additional, uh, binary operators. Again,
if you taken discrete math or any kind of set theory course,
this should all be very familiar. Uh, we can do a union,
right?
You basically take two relations and you're gonna take all the two poles that
are in the Wa and one relation also was in the other relation and combine them
together in, in a new relation. So for, so for this, I now have our relations,
our aid bid and asks with aid and bid. So when I take the union to them,
it's just again, concatenating the two relations together.
So in this example here, uh, it is ordered based on the two relations.
So in the output, I have all the two polls from our folly,
all the troubles from s, but again, under the relational model,
it's actually unordered.
So this can be actually in any possible order that it wants that or that,
you know, whenever the system wants to use. And in the,
there's a union operator and SQL essentially works just like this. So
for this to work though, what I'll say is that you have to have the, the,
the two relations you're trying to union together,
they have to have the exact same attributes for the same, same domain.
So same types, right? If the relation has a third attribute,
then the union wouldn't, wouldn't be allowed to proceed. And it works the same,
same way in the SQL, there's also intersection again,
same thing where you just basically get all the tuples that appear in both,
both, uh, input relations. So in case rns, when I take the intersection of them,
I only get that single tool. And again, the same thing. I can do this. You know,
there's a intersect operator in SQL and it has to assume that the two relations
have the exact same number of attributes. Uh, the last one is difference.
And again, you're basically taking, uh,
all the two poles that fear appear in the first relation and removing any ones
that appear in the second relation. And so again,
it works just like the other ones. I take the difference and uh,
the output and in, uh, in SQL,
the keyword is accept to do this.
Alright,
so now when does or maybe do a more complicated things to start combining these
two bullets together? Other than those basic set operators?
So the first thing we can do is take the product of two sets.
So this is sometimes called the Cartesian product. Basically,
you get all the tuples you get,
you're going to get a new relation as your output that contains all possible
combinations of the two posts from the two relations, right?
So you take rns, you take, you take a product of them, uh,
the cross join and then you produce in this, this giant map like this.
So here now again, we're not, we're actually can get nading the,
the two close together and producing them as, as a new tool.
So the first two relations,
the original Asians each had two columns and my output,
now they have four columns, right?
So for every single Tupelo in the first relation,
I'm concatenated together with every single Tupo in the second relation and so
forth. So it seems kind of useless, right? Why would it actually anyone,
you know, why would you actually want to do this?
And I think of an example where you would actually want to use something like
this,
was that join [inaudible] we'll see you on next slide.
And now this is a type of join, but it's actually, you know,
it's not trying to match things up,
but just trying to get all possible combinations.
So this shows up in testing a lot, right?
If you want to make sure that you test every single combination of different
parameters, you take the Cartesian product, right?
It's actually really simple to implement, right? Cause there's two, four loops.
We just, for every single entry in the first one,
look through every single century and the second one,
and concatenate and concatenate them together.
And SQL, there is a cross joint operator like this.
You can also get the same thing if you just have two relations listed in the
from clause without a where calls to define how they're actually being joined
together. All right,
so the thing that they asked about or that thing that somebody mentioned before
was to do a join.
And so s a join a join is basically like a superset of a cross joint.
Um, and this example here,
we're doing essentially what I'll call a straight joint or equity join or our
natural join where we're going to take a,
we're going to create a new relation where we get a combination of the two poles
that matched some predicate in, you know, in to do our join,
uh, in both of our relations. So in this example here,
we're gonna take the all, every single attributes in our,
and we're going to check and see if there's an,
a Tupelo in s that has the exact same values.
And the exact same attributes, right? So the output would look like this.
So a three and one are three.
There's only one tool in our has a match in s and that's produces or output,
right? It's called a natural joint cause it's the natural way, you know,
natural quotes. You would combine together, uh,
these two relations and sequel, you can evoke it directly as,
as a natural drawing like this. So again, it's going to look to see,
do I have to attribute to the exact same name in these two relations and check
to see whether they're values match up? Yes.
We'll section the question is what if there was between this and the
intersection, the intersection is removing any attributes? Uh,
no attribute of the same? Yes. Good question. It's difference.
Sorry, I wondering
that contained the tuples appear in both the input relations.
Okay.
In this case here, yes. It's the same.
Yes.
So natural joined it doesn't appear actually that much.
You actually don't want to use this because you're assuming that the,
you're sort of assuming that the Schema can match up based on the names.
We'll see examples when we talk about joins later in the semester where you can
actually define how you want to join and orange clause of the where clause.
Right. You actually, you ma you almost, and we'll never see something like this,
but this is how you would define it and the original relational Algebra in the
back. Yes.
This question is that the aid mat did not match with the bid value match would
still produce a joint output? No. Right.
Cause the national point because for everything we'll attribute it has the same.
Every single asked me that it has the same name. Actually this,
this is the answer to your question. Every single Astra has the same name.
I'll compare to see whether they match and if at least one of them doesn't match
then does not produce the output.
So there's this natural join and intersection intersection.
You have to have exactly the same attributes in the natural join.
I could have a third attribute on s and it wouldn't actually match them. Right?
Cause there's no corresponding one are,
okay.
So these seven operators that I should just went through, these are the,
again, the basic building blocks of what was defined by Ted cod in the original
relational model papers in the 1970s but it's obviously,
there's a bunch of examples we can think of where the original relational,
these original relational outros doesn't cover, right?
Sorting how to actually do updates, renaming the renaming the columns.
So after the original paper,
there was a Muslin extensions for the relational model,
relational Algebra that cover all these things we'd actually care about in, in,
in the real world, right?
So these are the basic symbols actually do these things. Again,
from our purposes,
we don't really care so much because we're actually building a system that, um,
that we can then apply these things on top of and go beyond what there is an
original relational Algebra can actually do. But again,
these are just important to sort of understand and know that they actually
exist. And we'll see them later on when we talk about query processing.
Okay.
So the question you had earlier before was
SQL essentially just relational Algebra. And I said, no. All right. Again,
the reason is because relational Algebra is still going to define the exact
steps wanna use to actually execute the query. So what do I mean by that?
Let's say I have two. I have a single query that wants to find all the,
uh, the entries, uh, from,
from the natural joint of rns where a bid equals one oh two.
So these two relational Algebra statements here are actually equivalent.
They will produce the same answer, right? The first one does the,
the National Joint Ping rns. Then it does the projection or sorry,
then does the restriction on the select to filter out all the entries where w
that were bid doesn't equal one a two. And in the second one here,
I actually do the selection on s first.
Then I do the national joint. These were produced the exactly the same answer,
but these are actually a lot different run time performance, right?
If I have,
if every single tuple in s has value equals one oh two,
then it's the same thing as, as this one here.
Cause they always can produce the same output.
But if only one out of a billion has value of one oh two then the second one is
x to be faster because I'm going to filter out everything then actually do the
join. So again,
this is why I was saying that in a procedural language like racial Algebra,
just still defining the steps you'd actually need to do to actually get the
query right.
And what we really want is just to say at a high level what,
what the answer we want and then we'll have the the days and figure out how to
do that for us. So in English, this sentence here retrieved the joint tuples.
Some rns were bid equals one oh two that's,
this is equivalent to what these guys are doing.
But I didn't say actually how to do it. The data's ism can figure out, oh,
why I have,
I have one to pull out of a billion that has value equals one oh two so let me
do my, my predicate first.
I mean you might filtering first and then I'll do my join, right?
Or if it knows that all the values, he goes one to two,
then now let's do the joint anyway because it doesn't,
it doesn't actually matter.
So this is what SQL is going to be for us, right?
It's going to be a way for us to define at a high level declare at a high level
what we want the answer to be regardless of how the, how the,
the, the, the data's actually being physically stored or how the, uh,
we want to order our operators in our relational Algebra.
So we'll see this later in the semester when we talk about query optimization.
There's a bunch of rules.
You can define how you actually can reorder relational Algebra operators and
began anted. They're always going to still produce the same answer. So the,
the main takeaway from this is that sequel is essentially the,
the de facto standard for how you write queries on the,
on our relational model databases. And a lot, actually a lot of the, uh,
the other data models that I talked about before,
a lot of these no SQL systems and, and uh, other types of systems,
they're now adding SQL support on top of it, uh, their,
their systems because it's, it's the factor of standard. It's everywhere.
This is what people would expect. Uh,
if you want to have a sort of a database system that people can use or want to
use.
So essentially what's going to happen is this an example I had before where I
looped through my flat file,
looked at every single line and try to find the match where, where the bag,
the name he goes ice cube.
But now I can just declare it my SQL statement at a high level.
This is the answer that I want at Jason's free to figure out the best way to
actually do it. Okay?
Okay.
Any questions?
[inaudible]
okay, so we'll finish up here.
Please leave your, uh,
your self assessment for the CBEST law staff before you leave. Can Somebody,
I'll post the answers tonight on Piazza.
It's gained from me trying to figure out how you actually,
how well you actually know. See I floss the main takeaway from all this again,
databases are everywhere. You're going to come across them throughout your life,
so they're important,
but they should Alvarez mean the perimeters we can build on top of,
do more complicated things and then we'll see later on.
Hatchi how do I take laser Algebra and generate optimized queries for that?
Okay. All right, so next class we will start,
we will cover what I call advanced sequel.
This is sort of like you're going to high level over your SQL.
Most of you guys already seen SQL fours.
We're not gonna spend time on how to write slacks.
We'll start with the advanced off on on Wednesday and you'll need this for
homework one. Okay? All right guys. See you on Wednesday.
Favorite. Oh, what is it? Yes,
it's the [inaudible] p e packs. I'll make a best somebody. Fuck you.
Do it like a trio.
I used to flip the teeth to the e to the t comes dope.
I'll play the game with no rules on the cuffs of [inaudible] with the bus.
A cap on the road, Bushwick gonna go with a blow to the eyes.
You're wrong. Rolling with the fuck and stop z.
When I potty by the 12 pack case, six pack,
40 aggregates the real price. I'll drink. What's y'all, what's Ricky? Buckets.
Toil. They build, make some fat,
but say nihs is straight so it really don't matter.